Dynamic Device Personalization (DDP) Package
============================================
February 21, 2020


Contents
========
- Overview
- Safe Mode
- Notes
- Installation & Troubleshooting
- Legal


Overview
========
Adapters based on the Intel(R) Ethernet Controller 800 Series require a Dynamic
Device Personalization (DDP) package file to enable advanced features (such as
dynamic tunneling, Flow Director, RSS, and ADQ).

DDP allows you to change the packet processing pipeline of a device by applying
a profile package to the device at runtime. Profiles can be used to, for
example, add support for new protocols, change existing protocols, or change
default settings. DDP profiles can also be rolled back without rebooting the
system.

The DDP package loads during device initialization. The driver checks to see if
the DDP package is present and compatible. If this file exists, the driver will
load it into the device. If the DDP package file is missing or incompatible
with the driver, the driver will go into Safe Mode where it will use the
configuration contained in the device's NVM. See "Safe Mode" later in this
README for more information.

A general purpose, OS-default DDP package is automatically installed with all
supported Intel Ethernet Controller 800 Series drivers on Microsoft* Windows*,
ESX*, FreeBSD*, and Linux* operating systems. Additional DDP packages are
available to address needs for specific market segments. For example, a
telecommunications (Comms) DDP package is available to support certain
market-specific protocols in addition to the protocols in the OS-default
package.

The OS-default DDP package supports the following:
- MAC
- EtherType
- VLAN
- IPv4
- IPv6
- TCP
- ARP
- UDP
- SCTP
- ICMP
- ICMPv6
- CTRL
- LLDP
- VXLAN-GPE
- VXLAN (non-GPE)
- Geneve
- GRE
- NVGRE
- RoCEv2


Safe Mode
=========
Safe Mode disables advanced and performance features, and supports only basic
traffic and minimal functionality, such as updating the NVM or downloading a
new driver or DDP package.

See the Intel(R) Ethernet Adapters and Devices User Guide for more details on
DDP and Safe Mode.


Notes
=====
- You cannot update the DDP package if any PF drivers are already loaded. To
overwrite a package, unload all PFs and then reload the driver with the new
package.

- Except for Linux, you can only use one DDP package per driver, even if you
have more than one device installed that uses the driver.

- Only the first loaded PF per device can download a package for that device.

- If you are using DPDK, see the DPDK documentation at https://www.dpdk.org/
for installation instructions and more information.


Installation and Troubleshooting
================================

Microsoft* Windows*
-------------------
The DDP package is installed as part of the driver binary. You don't need to
take additional steps to install the DDP package file.

If you encounter issues with the DDP package file, download the latest driver.


ESX
---
The DDP package is installed as part of the driver binary. You don't need to
take additional steps to install the DDP package file.

If you encounter issues with the DDP package file, download the latest driver.


FreeBSD
-------
The FreeBSD driver automatically installs the default DDP package file during
driver installation. See the ice driver README for general installation and
building instructions.

The DDP package loads during device initialization. The driver looks for the
ice_ddp module and checks that it contains a valid DDP package file.

If you encounter issues with the DDP package file, you may need to download an
updated driver or ice_ddp module. See the log messages for more information.

NOTE: It's important to do 'make install' during initial ice driver
installation so that the driver loads the DDP package automatically.


Linux
-----
The Linux driver automatically installs the default DDP package file during
driver installation. See the ice driver README for general installation and
building instructions.

The DDP package loads during device initialization. The driver looks for
intel/ice/ddp/ice.pkg in your firmware root (typically /lib/firmware/ or
/lib/firmware/updates/) and checks that it contains a valid DDP package file.
The ice.pkg file is a symbolic link to the default DDP package file installed
by the linux-firmware software package or the ice out-of-tree driver
installation.

If you encounter issues with the DDP package file, you may need to download an
updated driver or DDP package file. See the log messages for more information.

You can install specific DDP package files for different physical devices in
the same system. To install a specific DDP package:

1. Download the DDP package file (ice-x.x.x.x.zip) you want for your device. In
addition to licensing information and this README, this zip file contains the
following files:
    ice-x.x.x.x.pkg
    ice.pkg

NOTE: The ice.pkg file is a Linux symbolic link file pointing to
ice-x.x.x.x.pkg (in the same path).

2. Rename the ice-x.x.x.x.pkg file as ice-xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx.pkg, where
'xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx' is the unique 64-bit PCI Express device serial number (in
hex) of the device you want the package downloaded on. The filename must
include the complete serial number (including leading zeros) and be all
lowercase. For example, if the 64-bit serial number is b887a3ffffca0568, then
the file name would be ice-b887a3ffffca0568.pkg.

To find the serial number from the PCI bus address, you can use the following
command:

# lspci -vv -s af:00.0 | grep -i Serial
Capabilities: [150 v1] Device Serial Number b8-87-a3-ff-ff-ca-05-68

You can use the following command to format the serial number without the
dashes:

# lspci -vv -s af:00.0 | grep -i Serial | awk '{print $7}' | sed s/-//g
b887a3ffffca0568

3. Copy the renamed DDP package file to /lib/firmware/updates/intel/ice/ddp/.
If the directory does not yet exist, create it before copying the file.

4. Unload all of the PFs on the device.

5. Reload the driver with the new package.

NOTE: The presence of a device-specific DDP package file overrides the loading
of the default DDP package file (ice.pkg).


Legal / Disclaimers
===================
Copyright (c) 2019 - 2020, Intel Corporation.

Intel and the Intel logo are trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the U.S. and/or other countries.

*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.

This software and the related documents are Intel copyrighted materials, and
your use of them is governed by the express license under which they were
provided to you ("License"). Unless the License provides otherwise, you may not
use, modify, copy, publish, distribute, disclose or transmit this software or
the related documents without Intel's prior written permission.
This software and the related documents are provided as is, with no express or
implied warranties, other than those that are expressly stated in the License.
