.\"-
.\" SPDX-Fncense-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by SRI International and the University of
.\" Cambridge Computer Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract FA8750-10-C-0237
.\" ("CTSRD"), as part of the DARPA CRASH research programme.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 12, 2025
.Dt CHERIC 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cheri_address_get
.Nm cheri_address_set
.Nm cheri_base_get
.Nm cheri_bounds_set
.Nm cheri_ddc_get
.Nm cheri_fromint
.Nm cheri_is_sealed
.Nm cheri_length_get
.Nm cheri_offset_get
.Nm cheri_offset_inc
.Nm cheri_offset_set
.Nm cheri_pcc_get
.Nm cheri_perms_and
.Nm cheri_perms_clear
.Nm cheri_perms_get
.Nm cheri_seal
.Nm cheri_stack_get
.Nm cheri_tag_clear
.Nm cheri_tag_get
.Nm cheri_top_get
.Nm cheri_type_get
.Nm cheri_unseal
.Nm cheri_clear_low_ptr_bits
.Nm cheri_get_low_ptr_bits
.Nm cheri_set_low_ptr_bits
.Nd CHERI C built-in functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In cheri/cheric.h
.Ft ptraddr_t
.Fn cheri_address_get "void * __capability c"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_address_set "void * __capability c" "ptraddr_t address"
.Ft ptraddr_t
.Fn cheri_base_get "void * __capability c"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_bounds_set "void * __capability c" "size_t length"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_ddc_get "void"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_fromint "ptraddr_t"
.Ft bool
.Fn cheri_is_sealed "void * __capability c"
.Ft size_t
.Fn cheri_length_get "void * __capability c"
.Ft size_t
.Fn cheri_offset_get "void * __capability c"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_offset_inc "void * __capability c" "size_t offset"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_offset_set "void * __capability c" "size_t offset"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_pcc_get "void"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_perms_and "void * __capability c" "size_t mask"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_perms_clear "void * __capability c" "size_t mask"
.Ft size_t
.Fn cheri_perms_get "void * __capability c"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_seal "void * __capability c" "void * __capability typecap"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_stack_get "void"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_tag_clear "void * __capability c"
.Ft bool
.Fn cheri_tag_get "void * __capability c"
.Ft ptraddr_t
.Fn cheri_top_get "void * __capability c"
.Ft ptraddr_t
.Fn cheri_type_get "void * __capability c"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_unseal "void * __capability c" "void * __capability typecap"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_clear_low_ptr_bits "void * __capability c" "size_t mask"
.Ft size_t
.Fn cheri_get_low_ptr_bits "void * __capability c" "size_t mask"
.Ft void * __capability
.Fn cheri_set_low_ptr_bits "void * __capability c" "size_t mask"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Xr cheric 9
functions provide a C-language interface to inspect and modify capability
fields.
When a change is requested, a new capability is returned with the change
applied.
.Ss Querying capability fields
The following APIs allow capability fields to be queried:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width short
.It Fn cheri_address_get "c"
Return the address field of the capability
.Fa c .
This value will normally be the the same as the integer cast of a capability
pointer.
.It Fn cheri_base_get "c"
Return the base (bottom) address associated with the capability
.Fa c ;
this is its lower bound.
.It Fn cheri_offset_get "c"
Return the offset associated with capability
.Fa c ;
this is the difference between its address and its lower bound.
.It Fn cheri_perms_get "c"
Return the permissions associated with the capability
.Fa c .
.It Fn cheri_is_sealed "c"
Return a boolean indicating whether the capability
.Fa c
is sealed.
.It Fn cheri_tag_get "c"
Return a boolean indicating whether the capability
.Fa c
has a valid tag.
.It Fn cheri_type_get "c"
Return the object type of the capability
.Fa c .
.El
.Ss Setting capability fields
The following APIs allow capability fields to be set, with a new capability
returned:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width short
.It Fn cheri_perms_and "c" "mask"
Return a capability derived from
.Fa c
that has its permissions mask bit-wise AND'd with the value of
.Fa mask .
.It Fn cheri_tag_clear "c"
Return a capability derived from
.Fa c
that has its validity tag cleared.
.It Fn cheri_bounds_set "c" "length"
Return a capability derived from
.Fa c
that has its base set to the current address of
.Fa c ,
and length set to
.Fa length .
.It Fn cheri_offset_inc "c" "offset"
Return a capability derived from
.Fa c
that has its offset incremented by
.Fa offset .
.It Fn cheri_seal "c" "typecap"
Return a capability derived from
.Fa c
that is sealed using capability
.Fa typecap .
.It Fn cheri_offset_set "c" "offset"
Return a capability derived from
.Fa c
that has its offset field set to
.Fa offset .
.El
.Ss Capability address low bits
The following APIs assist in getting, setting, and clearing lower bits in
capabilities:
.Bl -tag -width short
.It Fn cheri_clear_low_ptr_bits "c" "mask"
Return a capability derived from
.Fa c ,
but with the bits of the address indicated by
.Fa mask
cleared.
.It Fn cheri_get_low_ptr_bits "c" "mask"
Return the lower bits of the address of capability
.Fa c
indicated by
.Fa mask .
.It Fn cheri_set_low_ptr_bits "c" "mask"
Return a capability derived from
.Fa c ,
but with the bits of the address indicated by
.Fa mask
set.
.El
.Ss Capability alignment
To be added.
.Ss Return special capabilities
The following APIs return capability pointers for certain well-defined
capabilities in the run-time environment:
.Bl -tag -width short
.It Fn cheri_ddc_get "void"
Return the Default Data Capability (DDC).
.It Fn cheri_pcc_get "void"
Return the Program-Counter Capability (PCC).
.It Fn cheri_stack_get "void"
Return the current stack capability.
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Robert N. M. Watson Aq Mt rwatson@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
This software and this manual page were
developed by SRI International and the University of Cambridge Computer
Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract
.Pq FA8750-10-C-0237
.Pq Do CTSRD Dc ,
as part of the DARPA CRASH research programme.
